---
layout: post
title: Cognitive Communication Coaching for Engineers
date: 2016-04-07 14:15:00
categories:
- professional
tags:
- presentation
- walk-away
- dolphin-map
- empathy
- internal-model
---

<div style="float:right; margin:1em; width:33%; text-align: center">
  <img src="/assets/dolphin.jpg"/>
</div>

Today, I want to talk about presentation techniques I learned during an
excellent lunch talk given my Tom Margolis. The talk was titled, "Cognitive
Communication Coaching for Engineers". Tom is a teacher turned engineer, so he's
in a prime position to talk on this subject.

It turns out that because of how our brains work, people can only carry a
certain level of cognitive load. It is as though our hippocampus is a post
office. When overloaded, people tend to drop facts on the floor. Tom's talk
centered around three principles for teaching information in a way that people
don't get overloaded and hence retain the material: walk-aways, dolphin maps,
and empathy.

I learned about the first principle, **walk-aways**, under the term
"take-aways". A talk should be designed so that the audience is expected to
remember just a handful of key concepts at most. These concepts are known as
"walk-aways", the ideas the listener should walk away with.

Tom told us that the presenter should focus on the walk-away. Any information
that isn't relevant to the walk-away is fluff, and should be discarded. This is
not to say that simply stating an idea as fact is sufficient. The presenter
needs to present enough data to support their point, to provide enough evidence
to convince the audience.

I learned from Tom that when you as presenter choose to introduce that extra
information, such as an anecdote or an example, it's important to let the
audience know that they are not expected to remember it. After all, it's not the
anecdote you tell that's important, it's the walk-away, and hence the audience
can forget the anecdote as long as they remember your point. These three
techniques (focus, fluff, and forget) allow the presenter to frame the
walk-aways in a way that's easy for the audience to digest.

The next principle is that of a "**dolphin map**". Dolphins swim by taking deep
breaths and staying underwater for many minutes at a time. However, they surface
their blowholes to breathe periodically. A presenter should do the same for
their audience.

Tom likened this to a map that a tour guide gives out. Even though the tour
won't get lost with a guide, the map allows the people on the tour to orient
themselves and to predict what's coming. The map relaxes people and allows them
to focus on the sights without worrying about details like when the next
bathroom break might be.

Tom suggests that presenters frame the details of each topic, whether it be the
presentation itself of a walk-away. He said the details should be sandwiched
between an introduction and a review. The introduction should explain how the
topic fits into the presentation, and the review should also mention this fit
and offer an opportunity for the audience to "take a breath" and ask questions.

This sandwich concept is a well-known technique, Aristotle was the one that
introduced the "tell them what you will tell them, tell them, tell them what you
told them" framework. However, Tom took this idea a step further. He used
consistent iconography in his presentation so that it was easy for us to look at
any slide and tell where we were in the presentation.

The last principle is that of **empathy**, and it's the one I found most
interesting. Tom talked about the idea that each of us has an internal model of
the world. Miscommunication abounds when two people have a different internal
model. One person's model might be rich and detailed, whereas another's might be
sparse and still forming.

An effective presenter will keep this in mind when crafting the presentation.
With each concept along the way, a presenter should communicate that model,
going as far as to define important concepts. In this way, the presenter offers
the audience a way to synchronize their internal model.

Tom gave the counter-example of "sticky note" communication. Sticky notes often
contain shorthand and only make sense to the writer. They assume a particular
internal model. When writing a presentation, it's important to avoid this kind
of "sticky note" writing, or you could lose your audience. Presenters should ask
themselves at every turn, "can someone misunderstand this?"

He also made a distinction between information and education. Information is
akin to saying, "here's my model". Education is the process of adjusting another
person's internal model. This comes into play in presentations when planning
exercises. Making mistakes with a guide is a good way to learning the process of
doing something. It's not a good way of learning information.

Not only is it frustrating to adjust your internal model over and over again
just to find out that you haven't matched the guide's model, but science shows
that the brain connects ideas but doesn't disconnect them. The mechanism is a
lot like the way ant make scent trails. Correct connections are the ones that
are refreshed over and over, whereas the wrong ones fade over time. A guide can
help minimize the number of wrong connections that are made, making it easier
for the audience to find the right ones.

Tom talked about three techniques for improving presentations: walk-aways,
dolphin maps, and empathy. In my next post, I'll talk about the two keynotes at
Mile High Agile 2016, and how these techniques manifested in their
presentations.
