---
layout: post
comments: true
title: First Professional Java
categories:
- coding
- professional
tags:
- Java
- languages
---

{% include side-image.html image="java.png" %}

I thought I'd hit a milestone in my career, but in writing this, I realized I
was wrong. I'm a professional computer programmer, among other things. I
recently moved to a Java development team, and I checked in my first code today.
I thought it was my first professional Java code, but that's not quite true.

I started out as a systems administrator for a mortgage credit reporting agency,
and in addition to shell scripting and Perl, I also wrote a basic call center
application in VB4 of all things using an Access front end. I moved on to
becoming a software support engineer, but beyond a few patches in ANSI C, my
repertoire was limited to Perl, with some HTML and JavaScript for my personal
homepage.

I couldn't get anyone to consider me for programming positions. One day though,
a few years later, I was approached for such a position -- because of that
program I wrote in VB4! The hiring manager wanted a VB programmer with with
previous mortgage experience. I wrote my first professional program in VB.NET,
converted it to C# shortly thereafter, and spent the next decade as a C#
programmer.

I've had brief stints in other languages. I'm often learning new languages to
expand my toolset and to learn new ways to program. Right now, it's Node.js.
And, although I'm a programmer, I'm still a shell scripter, though these days
it's in PowerShell.

I've done some professional work in other languages as well. I wrote a scripting
engine in Ruby for a C# web application. At another place, I developed an iOS
application that exposed some service data -- and then I deflated when I
realized that I contributed some code to the Android application we made as
well.

So, today wasn't my first check-in of Java code, but it is my first with Java as
my primary language.
