---
layout: post
title: Durfweb Post-Mortem
date: 2015-10-16 12:50:00
categories:
- professional
tags:
- business
- post-mortem
- retrospective
---

Two weeks ago, I ended my consulting firm, Durfweb. It was a difficult decision
emotionally, but it was the right decision from a business standpoint. I wanted
to get some distance and make some observations about it.

For those of you who are unfamiliar with Durfweb, it was founded on a freemium
pricing model, in which the Agile Chuck Wagon podcast was offered for free, with
technical and agile coaching consulting services offered at a premium.

## What Went Well

This firm was my first foray into running a business. It was an educational
experience, and there were some things that went well.

The most successful product of Durfweb was the podcast, the Agile Chuck Wagon. I
published 41 episodes over a span of nine months, averaging one a week. I don't
have the statistics in front of me, but episodes of the show were downloaded
over 4000 times, which works out to an average of 100 times an episode.

As an Agile Denver conference organizer, Durfweb obtained some gift in-kind
donation of services for advertising at the Mile High Agile conference. This
generated some additional web traffic and some positive verbal feedback about
the podcast. I heard similar comments at Agile Roots, which was also gratifying.

For our premium services, I quoted a per diem base rate that I felt was
competitive based on my market research. Most leads accepted the rate I quoted,
which confirmed that the price point I chose was reasonable.

## What Didn't Go Well

I learned about the inbound marketing model from a guest lecturer in my MBA
marketing class. It's a pull system in which people discover your product, some
learn more, and some decide to purchase. In the model, people start as
strangers, which you attract to your site through your blog and social media. I
feel like the podcast and the Durfweb website did a decent job of this. These
people become visitors. The next goal is to convert those visitors into leads
through techniques like calls-to-action, contacts and forms. Here, Durfweb did
not accomplish its mission.

I had a few campaigns designed to get people interested in learning more about
Durfweb, but none were particularly successful. A few that come to mind: I ran a
book giveaway contest on social media, I issued a call through the podcast and
on social media to rate the podcast on iTunes, and I created a badge system to
gamify learning more about Durfweb. No campaign elicited much response.

I was approached by a few people to perform consulting services. The idea was to
take fees from this and reinvest them into the business, snowballing capital to
grow the business. However, I wasn't able to convert these leads. More on this
in the next section.

The death knell for Durfweb came in the podcast download statistics. While I had
developed a small, loyal following, the download growth rate was linear,
indicating that the same 100 or so people were downloading episodes.
Listenership growth was stagnant for a period of several weeks, with two
marketing campaigns have no noticeable impact. The end result was that Durfweb
was spending money on Agile Chuck Wagon hosting and other podcast production
costs with no prospect of any returns.

## What to Improve Next Time

Durfweb was starved for resources. In order to get the market penetration we
sought, we would have needed to spend a lot more time, money and effort toward
Durfweb. A related issue was that Durfweb was originally envisioned as a
collaboration between me and my wife Candy, yet I took on the work of
bootstraping the business. As a result, most of the service inquiries we got
were more in my wheelhouse than hers. This made it difficult for Candy to help
get the business off the ground.

Next time, we need to market her offerings in such a way to ensure that our
leads develop in a more balanced manner. We also need to make sure that either
of us can perform our basic services. For example, we had one lead that fell
through due to scheduling issues. It was for a getKanban game facilitation
session, which I've run many times but Candy has not played before. We lost that
sale because of scheduling conflicts.

Durfweb's business model was to offer a customized coaching package for clients.
For each lead, I would do an initial consultation, describe what services I have
would apply to their situation, and negotiate an engagement. However, I lost
business with this model, because these prospects seemed to seek a pre-packaged,
flat-rate product. It seemed clear that they had a problem in mind, but didn't
seem as interested in solution discovery. We need to improve the packaging of our
services to more clearly describe the value proposition.

An example entry-level offering that would be to explicitly package facilitation
of the getKanban training game. We own a copy, and I have run it many times for
employers and clients. Helping clients apply the lessons of this game to their
particular situation could become a premium service.
