---
layout: post
comments: true
title: 'Parallels: How to Wage War and Agile'
date: 2012-10-22 19:01:15 -06:00
categories:
- op-ed
- process
tags:
- agile
- politics
- approaches
---

As a concerned American, I read David Brin's recent article about [the
differences in how Democrats and Republicans wage
war](http://davidbrin.blogspot.com/2012/10/how-democrats-and-republicans-wage-war.html)
with interest. It's well-written and worth careful consideration. He posits that
since Reagan, the Democratic strategy of limited, targeted involvement is more
effective than the all-in Republican one. He wrote the article to refute claims
that the Democrats are "soft" on war.

As a proponent of agile delivery methodologies, I saw another parallel. His
description of the approaches reminds me of comparisons made between agile
delivery and traditional delivery methods. In the article, Brin echoes
interviews with retired generals and admirals that on the whole, Democratic
presidents readily admit their ignorance on how to wage war and their readiness
to collaborate with military experts. By contrast, Republican presidents
formulate battle plans and expect the military to implement them.

I see these two approaches to project delivery in my line of work. Agile project
managers -- product owners -- seek collaboration with their delivery teams. They
advocate for the needs of the customer and are open to formulating a plan
together.

Other project managers, ones I've come to envision with a John Wayne attitude
and a PMP, fashion specifications and expect teams to implement them, which
works with varying degrees of success depending on the technical prowess of the
project manager. Seldom does the latter approach work; seldom does the former
approach fail. I find that when agile projects fail, it's in implementation more
often than in poor design.

As the article attests, there are edge cases in the Democratic approach, just as
there are with the agile one. One of the best project managers I've worked with
had a PMP and loved to collaborate with developers.

If this comparison between agile and politics is apt, does this imply that we
will see a paradigm shift in politics as we have in business as agile methods
gain traction and traditional delivery techniques flounder in the face of rapid
change?

One challenge an agile government would face is working in an environment that
is very resistant to change: public opinion. The American people are very
intolerant of change. Although the economy is shaky and many people see their
fortunes waning, attempts to reform campaign finance, healthcare, and social
conventions are met with staunch resistance. And yet it seems clear to me that,
in Game of Thrones parlance, winter is coming.

Somehow we the American people need to come together, collaborate, and innovate
a creative solution to the problems facing our nation. We need to foster a safe
to fail environment where ideas can be tried and honed. Otherwise, we are
entrusting our well-being and that of our descendants on the very few decision
makers.

I pray that we will begin this work very soon. We can't afford to ignore the
agile revolution in delivery methods much longer, especially in an institution
as important as our government.

_Tech note: I wrote this at lunch on my iPhone using a Bluetooth keyboard. It's
a brave new world. Feedback is welcome._
